PA1_template.md, before:

# Reproducible Research: Peer Assessment 1

## Loading and preprocessing the data

The activity data used in this exercise is downloaded and read in to the data frame _activity_. 


```r
  download.file("http://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/repdata%2Fdata%2Factivity.zip","activity.zip",method="auto") # Download the compressed file
  unzip("activity.zip") # Unzip it
  activity <- read.csv("activity.csv",header=TRUE) # Load into *activity* data frame
```

The _dplyr_ library is used in this analysis. 


```r
  library(dplyr, warn.conflicts=FALSE) # Load the dplyr library
```

# Exploratory plots

Exploratory data analysis was carried out without accounting for NA values, except by using _na.rm = TRUE_ as an option. 

Initially, a histogram was made to show the frequency of days with a given number of steps. The recommended minimum number of steps taken daily is 10,000. When missing values are ignored, 25 out of the 61 days fall below this limit. 

```r
  # Summarise the total number of steps per day
  hist_data <- summarise(group_by(activity,date),sum(steps,na.rm=TRUE))
  # Plot a histogram with three colours
  hist(unlist(hist_data[,2]),col=c("Red","Green","Blue"),xlab="Total Number of Steps",ylab="Number of Days",main="Frequency of Total Number of Steps per Day")
```

![](PA1_template_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-3-1.png) 


The total number of missing values is 2304: 


```r
  print(sum(is.na(activity$steps)))
```

```
## [1] 2304
```

## What is mean total number of steps taken per day?

When missing values are not accounted for, the mean total number of steps per day is 9354.23. The median value is higher: 10395 steps per day. 


```r
  total_steps <- summarise(group_by(activity,date),sum(steps,na.rm=TRUE))

  mean_value <- mean(total_steps$sum)
  median_value <- median(total_steps$sum)
  
  print(mean_value)
```

```
## [1] 9354.23
```

```r
  print(median_value)
```

```
## [1] 10395
```


## What is the average daily activity pattern?

The mean number of steps across all 61 days is calculated for each five-minute interval. 


```r
  # Summarise the mean number of steps per interval
  interval_steps <- summarise(group_by(activity,interval),mean=mean(steps,na.rm=TRUE))
  par(xaxt="n") # Don't print xtick labels
  # Plot the mean daily time profile of steps
  plot(interval_steps,type='l',main="Mean Number of Steps in each Time Interval",xlab="Time of Day",ylab="Mean Number of Steps")
  par(xaxt="s") # Set xtick label printing to standard
  # Set xtick label
  axis(1,at=c(0,600,1200,1800,2355),labels=c("0000","0600","1200","1800","0000"))
```

![](PA1_template_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-6-1.png) 

There is almost no activity between midnight and 05:00. Peak activity occurs between 08:30 and 09:00. Mean activity gradually tapers off between 19:00 and midnight.  

## Imputing missing values

A second data set is created, which replaces missing values with the average value in that five-minute interval across all days. By merging the *interval_steps* data set (288 observations, one per five-minute interval) with the _activity_ data set (17568 observations, one per five-minute interval on 61 consecutive days), the *interval_steps* data set is repeated 61 times in the *activity_new* data set. 


```r
  activity_new <- merge(activity,interval_steps) # Combine the two data frames
  # Replace any NA values with the mean value in that time interval
  index <- is.na(activity_new$steps)
  activity_new$steps[index] <- activity_new$mean[index]
```

A new histogram is plotted showing the frequency of total number of steps per day, when missing values have been imputed. 


```r
  # Summarise the total number of steps per day with NA values imputed
  hist_data <- summarise(group_by(activity_new,date),sum(steps,na.rm=TRUE))
  # Plot a histogram in three colours
  hist(unlist(hist_data[,2]),col=c("Red","Green","Blue"),xlab="Total Number of Steps",ylab="Number of Days",main="Frequency of Total Number of Steps per Day")
```

![](PA1_template_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-8-1.png) 

With missing values replaced with the average value for that time interval, the number of days where fewer than 10,000 steps are taken has fallen from 25 to 18. 

New mean and median values are calculated: 


```r
  # Calculate the mean value of total steps per day with imputed NA values
  total_steps <- summarise(group_by(activity_new,date),sum(steps,na.rm=TRUE))
  
  # Calculate mean and median values with imputed NA values
  mean_value <- mean(total_steps$sum)
  median_value <- median(total_steps$sum)
  
  print(mean_value)
```

```
## [1] 10766.19
```

```r
  print(median_value)
```

```
## [1] 10766.19
```

Both the mean and median values have now increased to 10766.19. The non-integer median value occurs because in each interval, the mean across all days has been used to fill in missing data. On the first day in the data set, all values are missing values. Therefore, on the first day, the total number of steps taken will be equal to the mean; and, unsurprisingly, this day also has the median number of steps per day. 

## Are there differences in activity patterns between weekdays and weekends?

The _weekdays()_ function is used to determine whether a particular date falls on a weekday or a weekend. 


```r
  # Set up a logical array to act as a weekday/weekend index
  weekday <- weekdays(as.Date(activity$date))
  weekday <- (weekday == "Saturday" | weekday == "Sunday")
```

A new factor value, *fac_wd*, is added to the *activity_new* data frame. The data frame is then filtered into weekday and weekend values. 


```r
  # Add a weekday/end factor to the *activity_new* data frame 
  activity_new$fac_wd <- factor(x=weekday,levels=c(FALSE,TRUE),labels=c("Weekday","Weekend"))

  # Split into two data sets based on weekday/end
  activity_weekday <- filter(activity_new,fac_wd=="Weekday")
  activity_weekend <- filter(activity_new,fac_wd=="Weekend")
```

The mean daily time profile is plotted for both weekdays and weekends. 


```r
  # Calculate the time profiles for weekdays and weekends
  weekday_steps <- summarise(group_by(activity_weekday,interval),mean(steps))
  weekend_steps <- summarise(group_by(activity_weekend,interval),mean(steps))
  
  # Set up a two-column plot
  par(mfcol=c(2,1))

  # Don't print xtick labels
  par(xaxt="n")
  # Plot the weekday time profiles
  plot(weekday_steps,type='l',main="Weekday Steps",xlab="Time of Day",ylab="Mean Number of Steps",col="Red")
  # Set the xtick label printing back to standard
  par(xaxt="s")
  # Label the xtick labels
  axis(1,at=c(0,600,1200,1800,2355),labels=c("0000","0600","1200","1800","0000"))

  # Don't print xtick labels
  par(xaxt="n")
  # Plot the weekend time profiles
  plot(weekend_steps,type='l',main="Weekend Steps",xlab="Time of Day",ylab="Mean Number of Steps",col="Red",xlim=c(0,2400),ylim=c(0,200))
  # Set the xtick label printing back to standard
  par(xaxt="s")
  # Label the xtick labels
  axis(1,at=c(0,600,1200,1800,2355),labels=c("0000","0600","1200","1800","0000")) 
```

![](PA1_template_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-12-1.png) 

Much fewer steps are taken at the weekend than on weekdays. The greatest difference is the large peak (up to about 200 steps per five-minute period) between 08:30 and 09:30 on weekdays, presumably a run before work or school. There is a similar, but less extreme, peak at the weekend. At the end of the day, between 18:00 and 20:00, there is a longer period with a less pronounced peak - possibly a walk home. Throughout the day, there are periods of moderate activity on both weekdays and weekends. In general, weekends seem to be more sedentary, although some early-morning movement at around 04:00 suggests at least one wild night out!

Commit message:

Forgot to include the max. step time interval

PA1_template.md, after:

# Reproducible Research: Peer Assessment 1

## Loading and preprocessing the data

The activity data used in this exercise is downloaded and read in to the data frame _activity_. 


```r
  download.file("http://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/repdata%2Fdata%2Factivity.zip","activity.zip",method="auto") # Download the compressed file
  unzip("activity.zip") # Unzip it
  activity <- read.csv("activity.csv",header=TRUE) # Load into *activity* data frame
```

The _dplyr_ library is used in this analysis. 


```r
  library(dplyr, warn.conflicts=FALSE) # Load the dplyr library
```

# Exploratory plots

Exploratory data analysis was carried out without accounting for NA values, except by using _na.rm = TRUE_ as an option. 

Initially, a histogram was made to show the frequency of days with a given number of steps. The recommended minimum number of steps taken daily is 10,000. When missing values are ignored, 25 out of the 61 days fall below this limit. 

```r
  # Summarise the total number of steps per day
  hist_data <- summarise(group_by(activity,date),sum(steps,na.rm=TRUE))
  # Plot a histogram with three colours
  hist(unlist(hist_data[,2]),col=c("Red","Green","Blue"),xlab="Total Number of Steps",ylab="Number of Days",main="Frequency of Total Number of Steps per Day")
```

![](PA1_template_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-3-1.png) 

The total number of missing values is 2304: 


```r
  print(sum(is.na(activity$steps)))
```

```
## [1] 2304
```

## What is mean total number of steps taken per day?

When missing values are not accounted for, the mean total number of steps per day is 9354.23. The median value is higher: 10395 steps per day. 


```r
  total_steps <- summarise(group_by(activity,date),sum(steps,na.rm=TRUE))

  mean_value <- mean(total_steps$sum)
  median_value <- median(total_steps$sum)
  
  print(mean_value)
```

```
## [1] 9354.23
```

```r
  print(median_value)
```

```
## [1] 10395
```


## What is the average daily activity pattern?

The mean number of steps across all 61 days is calculated for each five-minute interval. 


```r
  # Summarise the mean number of steps per interval
  interval_steps <- summarise(group_by(activity,interval),mean=mean(steps,na.rm=TRUE))
  par(xaxt="n") # Don't print xtick labels
  # Plot the mean daily time profile of steps
  plot(interval_steps,type='l',main="Mean Number of Steps in each Time Interval",xlab="Time of Day",ylab="Mean Number of Steps")
  par(xaxt="s") # Set xtick label printing to standard
  # Set xtick label
  axis(1,at=c(0,600,1200,1800,2355),labels=c("0000","0600","1200","1800","0000"))
```

![](PA1_template_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-6-1.png) 

There is almost no activity between midnight and 05:00. Peak activity occurs between 08:30 and 09:00. Mean activity gradually tapers off between 19:00 and midnight.  

The time interval with the maximum mean number of steps is at 08:35 (206 steps).


```r
  print(filter(interval_steps,mean==max(interval_steps$mean)))
```

```
## Source: local data frame [1 x 2]
## 
##   interval     mean
## 1      835 206.1698
```


## Imputing missing values

A second data set is created, which replaces missing values with the average value in that five-minute interval across all days. By merging the *interval_steps* data set (288 observations, one per five-minute interval) with the _activity_ data set (17568 observations, one per five-minute interval on 61 consecutive days), the *interval_steps* data set is repeated 61 times in the *activity_new* data set. 


```r
  activity_new <- merge(activity,interval_steps) # Combine the two data frames
  # Replace any NA values with the mean value in that time interval
  index <- is.na(activity_new$steps)
  activity_new$steps[index] <- activity_new$mean[index]
```

A new histogram is plotted showing the frequency of total number of steps per day, when missing values have been imputed. 


```r
  # Summarise the total number of steps per day with NA values imputed
  hist_data <- summarise(group_by(activity_new,date),sum(steps,na.rm=TRUE))
  # Plot a histogram in three colours
  hist(unlist(hist_data[,2]),col=c("Red","Green","Blue"),xlab="Total Number of Steps",ylab="Number of Days",main="Frequency of Total Number of Steps per Day")
```

![](PA1_template_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-9-1.png) 

With missing values replaced with the average value for that time interval, the number of days where fewer than 10,000 steps are taken has fallen from 25 to 18. 

New mean and median values are calculated: 


```r
  # Calculate the mean value of total steps per day with imputed NA values
  total_steps <- summarise(group_by(activity_new,date),sum(steps,na.rm=TRUE))
  
  # Calculate mean and median values with imputed NA values
  mean_value <- mean(total_steps$sum)
  median_value <- median(total_steps$sum)
  
  print(mean_value)
```

```
## [1] 10766.19
```

```r
  print(median_value)
```

```
## [1] 10766.19
```

Both the mean and median values have now increased to 10766.19. The non-integer median value occurs because in each interval, the mean across all days has been used to fill in missing data. On the first day in the data set, all values are missing values. Therefore, on the first day, the total number of steps taken will be equal to the mean; and, unsurprisingly, this day also has the median number of steps per day. 

## Are there differences in activity patterns between weekdays and weekends?

The _weekdays()_ function is used to determine whether a particular date falls on a weekday or a weekend. 


```r
  # Set up a logical array to act as a weekday/weekend index
  weekday <- weekdays(as.Date(activity$date))
  weekday <- (weekday == "Saturday" | weekday == "Sunday")
```

A new factor value, *fac_wd*, is added to the *activity_new* data frame. The data frame is then filtered into weekday and weekend values. 


```r
  # Add a weekday/end factor to the *activity_new* data frame 
  activity_new$fac_wd <- factor(x=weekday,levels=c(FALSE,TRUE),labels=c("Weekday","Weekend"))

  # Split into two data sets based on weekday/end
  activity_weekday <- filter(activity_new,fac_wd=="Weekday")
  activity_weekend <- filter(activity_new,fac_wd=="Weekend")
```

The mean daily time profile is plotted for both weekdays and weekends. 


```r
  # Calculate the time profiles for weekdays and weekends
  weekday_steps <- summarise(group_by(activity_weekday,interval),mean(steps))
  weekend_steps <- summarise(group_by(activity_weekend,interval),mean(steps))
  
  # Set up a two-column plot
  par(mfcol=c(2,1))

  # Don't print xtick labels
  par(xaxt="n")
  # Plot the weekday time profiles
  plot(weekday_steps,type='l',main="Weekday Steps",xlab="Time of Day",ylab="Mean Number of Steps",col="Red")
  # Set the xtick label printing back to standard
  par(xaxt="s")
  # Label the xticks
  axis(1,at=c(0,600,1200,1800,2355),labels=c("0000","0600","1200","1800","0000"))

  # Don't print xtick labels
  par(xaxt="n")
  # Plot the weekend time profiles
  plot(weekend_steps,type='l',main="Weekend Steps",xlab="Time of Day",ylab="Mean Number of Steps",col="Red",xlim=c(0,2400),ylim=c(0,200))
  # Set the xtick label printing back to standard
  par(xaxt="s")
  # Label the xticks
  axis(1,at=c(0,600,1200,1800,2355),labels=c("0000","0600","1200","1800","0000")) 
```

![](PA1_template_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-13-1.png) 

Much fewer steps are taken at the weekend than on weekdays. The greatest difference is the large peak (up to about 200 steps per five-minute period) between 08:30 and 09:30 on weekdays, presumably a run before work or school. There is a similar, but less extreme, peak at the weekend. At the end of the day, between 18:00 and 20:00, there is a longer period with a less pronounced peak - possibly a walk home. Throughout the day, there are periods of moderate activity on both weekdays and weekends. In general, weekends seem to be more sedentary, although some early-morning movement at around 04:00 suggests at least one wild night out!
